# PISA Data Exploration
## by Simon Hwang


## Dataset

The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) is a means of measuring 15-year-old student ability in reading, mathematics, and science. PISA was created by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), which is headquartered in France and was founded in 1961 to promote global economic growth and world trade. The assessments are conducted every 3 years since 2000, and usually garner participation from about 80 countries. Countries are asked to sample at least 5000 students, but may test more if they wish to acquire more regional and subregional information. The samples are chosen in a two stages - random school selection, and then random students selection. Due to this two-stage sampling, and the variable sample sizes, the OECD recommends weighting each student's data, using replicates to compute error, and provides plausible values for the test scores (see note below for more information). This dataset was based on the student questionnaire of the 2012 PISA, the full report of which can be viewed [here](http://www.oecd.org/pisa/pisaproducts/PISA-2012-technical-report-final.pdf).

The dataset was accessed via this link: <https://www.google.com/url?q=https://s3.amazonaws.com/udacity-hosted-downloads/ud507/pisa2012.csv.zip&sa=D&ust=1554482573645000>

>Note: As mentioned above, the OECD, in the [PISA Data Analysis Manual (2nd Edition)](https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/pisa-data-analysis-manual-spss-second-edition/resource/4621631e-7044-4fca-9ab7-17f525be20a1), recommends using three methods for appropriately wrangling the raw PISA data: weights, replicates, and plausible values. Unfortunately, these methods are not covered in the Udacity Data Analyst Nanodegree and are not warranted for the completion of this project. I will not be using them in my exploration or presentation of results, so any conclusions or relationships are subject to significant error and should be seen as demonstrative of the Udacity program's core proficiencies, rather than true results.	

## Summary of Findings

Through univariate exploration, I was able to confirm the methodology describe by OECD in their [2012 PISA report](http://www.oecd.org/pisa/pisaproducts/PISA-2012-technical-report-final.pdf). All OECD countries (except Iceland, which has special exemption due to its low population) were very close to or exceeded the 5,000 student minimum sample size recommended by the OECD. The two-stage sampling was able to yield almost equal sex sizes (female 50.18%, male 49.82%). Then, the distributions of the socioeconomic index (ESCS) and the averages of the reading, math, and science scores made evident the relativistic nature of the scoring. Those four values are nearly perfect normal distributions.

Exploring the bivariate relationships in this dataset, I found that there was a very strong correlation between the intelligence scores of the PISA exam. Students with strengths in Math, Reading, or Science tended to also be strong in both the other categories. Some countries tended to have much more skewed samples when I examined country and sex representation simultaneously, with Mexico having a clearly larger female sampling. This, coupled with Mexico's much higher rate of testing, likely causes the higher percentage of female representation overall. Ordinarily, this discrepancy would be negated by the weighting of student responses by the country's total population, as suggested by the PISA Data Analysis Manual. Since I am avoiding that approach to stay within the bounds of this course, it could be prudent to look at the sex representations relative to the sample size.

For multivariate exploration, I investigated whether the global bivariate trends were obvious across OECD countries. This did not seem to be the case, and I also did not find any clear national trends based on sex. I looked at a snapshot of my home country, the USA, to confirm that the global trends were present on the national level as well.

## Key Insights for Presentation
I selected to walk through the exploration of the student sample sizes by country, sex, and then their possible effect on PISA scores. Starting with showing that the basis for assuming a standard random sample is flawed, I was able to polish a univariate graph by adding a line denoting a key value and adding appropriate labels and titling. This shows the key point of many countries far exceeding the PISA recommended minimum sample size. Following this, a pie chart simply demonstrates that just 4 of the 34 countries can account for more than a third of the total OECD student responses. A breakdown of the student samples by country and sex elucidates the ease of skewing statistics calculated without accounting for population size. Lastly, I demonstrate the broad range of responses when looking at the PISA averages broken down by country and sex. This brings home the necessity for following strict data wrangling processes that ensure proper accounting for sampling distributions and errors caused by non-standard sampling, as used in PISA.